---
title: Introduction
layout: home
nav_order: 1
---

## What are coherent structures?

Coherent structures are structures that maximally persist in a flow, influencing the material transport and deformation generated [1]. There are different methods proposed in the literature to compute these structures from flow data. In this website, we will be using the finite time Lyapunov exponent (FTLE) to identify coherent structures in the flow, due to its simplicity. 

The FTLE is computed from the Lagrangian deformation generated by the flow and are therefore objective; ie, they are invariant to time-dependent rigid rotations and  translations. Coherent structures identified using FTLE fields are also mathematically shown to be the most robust structures in the flow, thereby making it robust to noise [2]. 


## Why is coherent structure identification useful?

The FTLE helps identify the finite-time analogues of the stable and unstable manifolds, thereby providing a reduced representation of a temporally and spatially varying flow. The reduced representation therefore enables a systematic comparison between flows in different experimental setups and with different theoretical model of the flow. Coherent structures also provides a simplified understanding of the flow geometry, which aids in the study of funtion of flows generated, such as in morphogenesis where material transport is important.

Recent work have demonstrated the usefulness of analyzing active flows generated by biological systems through a coherent structures framework. See the [link](./docs/FTLEinBiology) for a detailed list of papers using the ideas of coherent structures in addressing questions in biology. Simarly the there has been recent advances in understanding active nematic systems using flow structures (See [link](./docs/FTLEinActiveSystems) for a list of papers), which we expect to increase going forward.

## How do we calculate FTLE?

To compute the FTLE field we start of by describing the dynamical system $$\frac{d \mathbf{x}}{dt} = \mathbf{v}(\mathbf{x},t)$$, where $$\mathbf{v}(\mathbf{x},t)$$ is the velocity field generated from the material flow. 

>> In general, to experimentally compute the velocity field of a flow PIV methods are used (See [Ref](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Particle_image_velocimetry), [PIVLab](https://pivlab.blogspot.com/p/blog-page_19.html) is a MATLAB toolbox to easily compute PIV). 

To study the Lagrangian features of the flow, we compute the flow map  
$$ \mathbf{F}_{t_0}^t  = \int $$

The FTLE is computed using the right Cauchy-Green strain tensor $$\mathbf{C}_{t_0}^t(\mathbf{x}_0)$$, which quantifies the Lagrangian deformation experienced by a material patch initially at $$\mathbf{x}_0$$ over the time-interval $$[t_0,t]$$. 
 

## References

[1] : Haller, G., 2015. Lagrangian coherent structures. Annual review of fluid mechanics, 47(1)

[2] : Haller, G. and Yuan, G., 2000. Lagrangian coherent structures and mixing in two-dimensional turbulence. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 147(3-4)

